Oracle srvctl Basics – Listener and Database Commands

SRVCTL
You can use SRVCTL commands to 
add, 
remove, 
start, 
stop, 
modify, 
enable, 
and disable a number of 
entities, 
such as databases, 
instances, 
listeners, 
SCAN listeners, 
services, 
grid naming service (GNS), and 
Oracle ASM.”

Once you are in a RAC configuration, you should be using only SRVCTL to start and stop the database and SCAN listener.

SRVCTL Command Reference
object names
Database
instance
listener
service names

srvctl command object [options]
DB_UNIQUE_NAME and INSTANCE_NAME

***The database has a name for the whole: parameter DB_UNIQUE_NAME
SQL> show parameter db_unique_name

***Each instance has its own name: parameter INSTANCE_NAME
SQL> show parameter instance_name

SCAN Listener
The Single Client Access Name (SCAN) provides a single name for clients to access any client database running the Cluster. The SCAN listener is a separate process that runs on the database server computer. It receives incoming client connection requests and manages the traffic of these requests to the database server. In other words, for a remote connection to be made to the database, the listener must be running.

Checking the Status of a Listener
To check the status, use the following command and you will get the following result. With no options specified, the status of the default listener is returned.

srvname:oracle:db1> srvctl status listener
Listener LISTENER is enabled
Listener LISTENER is running on node(s): oraclerac1,oraclerac2
Starting a Listener
Start the default listener by executing the command below. With no options specified, the status of the default listener is returned. The command does not return any feedback. Check the listener status to verify.

srvname:oracle:db1> srvctl start listener
Stopping a Listener
Start the default listener by executing the command below. With no options specified, the status of the default listener is returned. The command does not return any feedback. Check the listener status to verify.

srvname:oracle:db1> srvctl stop listener
Starting and Stopping the Database
Checking the Status of a Database
To check the status, use the following command and you will get the following result. The -d parameter is required and is the unique name for the database.

srvname:oracle:db1> srvctl status database -d mydb
Instance mydb1 is running on node oraclerac1
Instance mydb2 is running on node oraclerac2
Starting the Database
Start the database by executing the command below. The -d parameter is required and is the DB_UNIQUE_NAME for the database. The command does not return any feedback. Check the database status to verify. The -o option is the same as the regular options for startup: nomount, mount, or open.

srvname:oracle:db1> srvctl start database -d mydb -o open
Stopping the Database
Start the database by executing the command below. The -d parameter is required and is the DB_UNIQUE_NAME for the database. The command does not return any feedback. Check the database status to verify. The -o option is the same as the usual options for shutdown: immediate, abort, transactional or normal.

srvname:oracle:db1> srvctl stop database -d mydb -o immediate